Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops and
the Mgen by Doctor Christopher Federico. He's professor of
Political Science and psychology at the University of Minnesota.
And today we're talking about political preferences, ideological belief
systems, collective narcissism, conspiracy thinking, ideological uncertainty, and some
other related topics. So, Doctor Federico, welcome to the
show. It's a huge pleasure for everyone.
Oh, thanks for having me.
So, I would like to start here with the
topic of political preferences. So when studying the foundations
of political preferences, where do you start? I mean,
what factors do you look into?
Well, to make sense of this, uh, you really
need to look at two sets of factors. Uh,
ONE, we generally refer to as bottom-up factors. So
these are really sort of characteristics of individuals, their
psychological needs, traits, and motives. Uh, THAT might attract
them to this or that political view. Uh, IN
some cases, these traits may stand in for other
things we can observe, but, uh, at some level,
the basic ideas that are their characteristics that we
hold as individuals, um, or that might reflect our
immediate situations that sort of predispose people to gravitate
toward this or that, uh, political identity or political
preference. So that's one part of it. Uh, ANOTHER
part of it is what you might call, uh,
top-down forces or top down variables. So these are
things like the nature of the political culture that
you live in, um, the groups that you are
a part of in the political world, so say
political parties and what have you. Uh, AND in
particular the role of what, uh, political scientists call
political elites. So, party leaders, intellectuals, media figures, pundits,
and what have you that uh sort of model,
uh, the packages of beliefs that make up this
or that party's idea or a particular ideology, um,
as we might call it, um. And, uh, what
a lot of the work that me and some
of the people I work with have shown is
that, you know, these individual differences, the bottom-up factors,
they may very well predispose people to adopt this
or that political identity or be attracted to. This
or that political preference, but, um, really, uh, the
menu of choices that people have to draw from,
that's sort of a, a top-down process. A lot
of that is constructed by political elites. Uh, THEY
don't spring from people's heads, um, really, uh, your
society and particularly in particular political leaders within it
kind of offer you a menu of options. And
the extent to which you map your own, uh,
sort of individual needs, traits, and motives onto certain
types of political preferences has to do with how
much attention you pay, uh, to mainstream political discourse,
uh, to political leaders and what have you. So
really it's a combination of top-down and bottom-up factors
and other variables that kind of determine the extent
to which people make a connection between the two.
OK. So uh talking specifically about liberal and conservative
attitudes, do we know where broad-based liberal and conservative
attitude packages stem from? I mean, why is it
that apparently some people hold broadly liberal worldviews and
other people hold broadly conservative worldviews?
Well, there are a variety of answers to that
and uh some of these answers, you know, focus
again more on the bottom up type variables, needs,
traits and motives that we have as individuals and
that, you know, Different individuals have different versions of,
um, uh, other people kind of focus more on
uh the bottom or the top-down aspect of this.
Um, MY own approach kind of again, you know,
focuses on, uh, both of these things. Uh, SO
part of what is going on here is really
how do political leaders operating under certain Social and
historical circumstances, how do they combine different packages of
policies, values, uh, broad social and political goals, and
what have you. So, uh, to some extent, uh,
the packages or the ideological packages of beliefs that,
uh, we call liberalism and conservatism or left or
right, um, you know, they're a function of the
particular societies we live in. Uh, SO if you
look in particular at English speaking countries and many
Western European countries, uh, you have what might be
regarded as sort of the standard left versus right
package. So, you know, you have um a right
or a set of conservative, uh, political forces that,
um, Tend to, uh, want stability, tradition, order, and
what have you, and are more comfortable with society
being organized in a hierarchical fashion. Um, uh, ON
the other hand, uh, you traditionally have, uh, a
left. Uh, WHICH is more open to change, which
is more interested in, uh, reducing hierarchy and, uh,
achieving equality, and that's really sort of the organization
of the organization of political competition you see much
in the western world. Uh, OUR understanding of left
versus right really kind of goes back to the
French Revolution, um, uh, in many respects. Now, uh,
well that is very much how uh political debate
and political conflict is organized, uh, particularly among leaders
and elites and very highly engaged people, uh, again
in Western Europe and also in many English-speaking countries,
it's not universal throughout the globe. Uh, ONCE you
get outside those parts of the globe, uh, you
don't always consistently. Say, uh, say a preference for
more uh economic in more economic equality and greater
government intervention in the economy paired with what we
might call social and cultural liberalism. That really sorts,
uh, sort of breaks down. So part of the
extent to which we see the traditional left and
right packages grouped together, really, you know, it, it
depends on particular social circumstances. Now, uh, in terms
of how individuals Map their own needs, traits, and
motives onto that and get attracted to a liberal
or a conservative viewpoint. Uh, REALLY the exact way
that happens sort of depends on the society you're
in. So, um, you know, political psychologists and social
psychologists have really studied this. Um, THEY initially studied
it the most in Western European societies in America
and Great Britain, traditionally what was found there is,
um, If uh you have traits that are more
what we would call uh closed or that emphasize
uh a need for certainty and security, the more
likely you are to be attracted to uh conservative
ideologies. The idea there is that um conservatism by
retaining the status quo provides people with certainty in
order that they might not otherwise have if they
were more open to change. And the reverse goes
for people who are, say, more open, um, and
whose needs for certainty and security are not quite
as strong. Um, THEY will be more amenable to
the left, to liberalism, to change, to openness and
what have you. And we have a lot of
evidence for that, uh, in particular societies. Uh, THAT
said, uh, there are some, uh, limits to that,
even in the kind of society where you have
that sort of tradition, very traditional left-right structure. So
one thing we find is that, uh, if you
look at these traits at the individual level that
represents, say, high needs for certainty and security. Um,
THEY really align only with certain kinds of conservative
preferences more than others. Uh, SO in particular, we
find that variables that represent needs for certainty and
security, personality traits, basically, uh, they tend to predict
social and cultural conservatism, so religious conservatism, moral conservatism,
uh, wanting traditional values and what have you. Uh,
THE relationship. Between, uh, having a strong need for
certainty and security and say, uh, wanting more market-oriented
form of economics versus a more distributive redistributive form
of economics, that is far weaker and, uh, we
find that, you know, the nature of that relationship,
uh, in the economic realm really kind of depends
on how much attention you pay to politics. So,
uh, that relationship is not universal, uh, and the
other thing is it kind of again, uh, once
you leave Western European society, English speaking societies, uh,
you get some very different patterns.
Mhm. So, I would like to ask you now
about ideological belief systems because it's political attitudes are
one thing, but then we also have the sort
of packages of policy preferences that uh come together
into ideological belief systems. But I would like to
ask you about one specific kind of view because
I think there are many here of uh ideological
belief systems that is the elite driven view of
them. So could you tell us about it and
more generally, what do you think about it?
Uh, IDEOLOGICAL belief systems,
uh, yeah, and then n view of them.
OK, so, um, you know, the question is where
do what we call ideologies come from, um, what
undergirds them, uh, and, you know, you might as
well define this ahead of time, and ideology is
really sort of a network of associated, uh, issue
preferences, values, and identities. That have been grouped together
for some reason. So again, we talked a little
bit earlier about, you know, what makes the left
the left and the right the right in many
societies. Traditionally, in, in Western society, the notion of
the right, for example, is a combination of preferring
tradition, order, and security on one hand and being
more amenable to certain forms of inequality or hierarchy
on the other. So why, why are those things
tied together? And, uh, I think the argument that
most political scientists would make is that, um, you
know, when we try to figure out why are
these things slotted together or packaged together as ideologies,
it's not necessarily that there's some intrinsic logical relation
between, uh, different, uh, beliefs. System elements, as we
would call it. So, you know, why is there
any logical reason that, uh, people would want a
combination of very, very low taxes on the wealthy
and, uh, more restriction of abortion? It's not entirely
clear, and, uh, this point was famously made by
a political scientist. Uh, NAMED Philip Converse, um, you
know, who said that if we want to understand
why belief systems hang together or why ideologies fit
together, uh, a lot of it is due to
the norms established by political leaders. So in particular,
he emphasized, and a lot of other political scientists
emphasized party leaders. Uh, PARTY leaders packaged together different
sets of issue positions, values, themes, identities, and what
have you. And the question is why do they
do this and how do they do this? Well,
you know, that is something, uh, that I think
in many respects is looked at in strategic terms.
So in particular, party leaders are trying to put
together winning coalitions, uh, groups of enough people who
have different interests, um, that, you know, eventually reach
a large enough size, uh, to win elections, uh,
win contests, basically. So part of it is strategic,
you know, it's kind of finding, well, if you
work with me on this issue, I'll work with
you on that issue, and I'll support that, um.
So part of it is indeed strategic, basically the
maintenance and cre creation and maintenance of coalitions. Uh,
SO politicians, uh, particularly elected officials and party officials
play a large role in that. Um, uh, ONE
thing that's also been studied by political scientists is
the role of what you might call intellectuals, academics,
scribblers, uh, pundits, um, what, um, Uh, my colleague
Hans Knoll in political science calls coalition merchants essentially.
Um, AND these are people who say, you know,
write for news magazines who are pundits who kind
of opine on politics, and, uh, often what they
are doing is they're kind of surveying the political
landscape and saying, well, you know, We can potentially
join the people who are interested in this kind
of thing together with these kind of people to
create a broader coalition that can win elections. And
what those folks do in particular is they sort
of manufacture or help develop or they elaborate. The
philosophical rationales that make up, you know, liberalism or
conservatism or socialism or whatever ideology you have in
mind at a given time and period. So they
kind of elaborate all the arguments about why different
things go together. So in terms of the actual
construction of these ideologies, a lot of it is
top down. Uh, NOW, again, There are limits to
that. Uh, SO, uh, often there may be reasons
that are more bottom up or psychologically driven why
certain, uh, types of beliefs and attitudes hang together
within particular domains. So again, if we think about
a limited domain of people's political preferences, say what
are broadly referred to as social and cultural or
moral issues, um, uh, I would say that Uh,
the reason why we see correlations between, say, greater
support for gay rights and greater support for abortion
rights, um, and, uh, things of that nature is
that, uh, a lot of those things are very
much driven by the same underlying, uh, Needs, traits,
and motives or preferences that people have at a
psychological level. Those things can very readily be linked
to needs for certainty and security. People who are
more strongly, uh, oriented toward having certainty and security
will kind of want to stick with what is
traditional, uh, what, uh, sort of, uh, emphasizes tight
social norms, so to speak, rather than greater individual
freedom. So in limited domains like that, very specific
domains, you might see more of a bottom-up effect.
But if we're talking about whole big ideologies that
transcend multiple domains economics, uh, foreign policy, uh, social
and cultural and moral issues, then you start to
really get into something that is very much the
role of political elites of various sorts.
OK, so I would like to ask you now
about the set of uh phenomena here. First, what
is collective narcissism?
OK, well, collective narcissism is sort of a group
level equivalent of what we think of as narcissism
at the individual level. Um, THIS is a concept
that was developed by a colleague of mine named
Doctor Agnieszka Goletz Diavala, and, uh, this, she's done
a lot of work on this in the last
15 years. I've done some of this work with
her. Uh, BASICALLY collective narcissism is, uh, an exaggerated
sense of in-group worth, uh, sort of an exaggerated
feeling that your group is exceptional, which is combined
with a perception that others don't respect the group
enough. So it's sort of a brittle, exaggerated, uh,
love of the in-group, so to speak. And uh
people who are high in collective narcissism with respect
to a particular group identity, uh, they tend to
be very sensitive to perceived slights to their group
or perceived signs that their group is not respected
enough. And when they believe that their group is
not respected enough, they tend to respond with hostility,
with prejudice, with intergroup aggression. Uh, AND a variety
of other things like that that, you know, you
notice in political contexts. Now, um, collective narcissism is
a very general idea. It can apply to any
number of, uh, types of group identities we hold.
So, you know, there's such thing as racial collective
narcissism. You can measure with respect to a particular
religious identity, you can uh, you can look at
it with respect to gender. IDENTITY. But, uh, in
research on this, the one that has been looked
at the most is what we call national collective
narcissism. So it's very specifically a perception that the
national in-group or your country is exceptional, extraordinary, uh,
but not respected enough by others. Uh, AGAIN, it's
a very exaggerated sense of group regard that's sort
of out of line with, uh, Uh, reality in
some respects, and we, we find that a tendency
to be high in national collective narcissism is associated
with all kinds of phenomena that really relate to
be, uh, being hostile and prejudiced and what have
you. There are more details to it, of course,
and some exceptions and different ways it plays out,
but that's the gist of it.
Mhm. So, and the other phenomenon I would like
to ask you about is in-group satisfaction. So what
is in-group satisfaction and is there any link between
collective narcissism and it?
OK, so in-group satisfaction is a little bit more
general than collective narcissism. In-group satisfaction is very simply
feeling proud of the group you belong to. Uh,
YOU know, if you talk about it in the
context of how you feel about your country, your
nation, it's what we would call patriotism. It's just
loving your group and the fact that you were
a member of it. It doesn't necessarily imply hostility
toward uh other groups or a deep sense of
superiority or anything like that. Um, NOW, uh, Typically,
collective narcissism and in-group satisfaction are considered uh in
conjunction with one another in research on this topic
because, um, collective narcissism is often sort of, uh,
if you look at it and work on this,
it sort of represents the, um, Uh, narcissistic or
hostile aspect of being attached to a group and
liking a group. Uh, SO we do find that,
uh, in-group satisfaction and collective narcissism are positively related
to one another. All other things being equal, uh,
people who have a high sense of in-group satisfaction
also tend to be, uh, collective narcissists. Now the
important thing is that there's not 100% overlap between
those things. Not everyone who feels a strong sense
of in-group pride or in-group satisfaction is a collective
narcissist and vice versa. And, uh, there's some interesting
things you find when, uh, you consider Uh, collective
narcissism and in group satisfaction at the same time
as predictors of other things, like, for example, predictors
of hostility toward other groups of prejudice against other
groups. So as it turns out, once you, uh,
isolate the part of collective narcissism. That, uh, does
not overlap, that's independent of in-group satisfaction. You find
that that still predicts being hostile and prejudiced to
other groups. But when you look at the other
way around, when you look at the portion of
in-group satisfaction, uh, that overlaps with collective narcissism, that
is when you control for collective narcissism, you find
that what's left over is sort of a more
healthy, uh, form of pride in the in-group. And
you know, once you take out or account for
the part of in-group satisfaction that overlaps with collective
narcissism, what's left over is often associated with a
stronger sense of in-group friendship, positivity, and, uh, you
know, relative lack of bias toward outgroups. And there
are any number of examples of that you can
find out there. There's evidence of this pattern with
respect to, for example, uh, wanting to see your
national in-group or your nation militarily or economically dominate
others. So collective narcissism, national collective narcissism, very strongly
predicts that's sort of wanting your country to dominate
others, and it does even after you control for
satisfaction. But if you look at in-group satisfaction on
the other hand, and you control for collective narcissism,
that is, you take out the part of in-group
satisfaction that reflects collective narcissism, what's left over that
non-narcissistic part of in-group satisfaction, um, that tends to
predict a reduced level of support for wanting your
national in-group to dominate others, either militarily. Or economically.
So the basic idea here is that in-group satisfaction
and collective narcissism, they're related to one another, but
once you get rid of the overlap between them
or account for the overlap between them, they tend
to relate to intergroup behavior and attitudes in very
different ways. Collective narcissism tends to promote and escalate
conflict, uh, in-group satisfaction, at least after you account
for the part of it that overlaps with collective
narcissism. That uh is often associated with reduced uh
uh conflict and a reduced tendency to escalate uh
hostilities with other groups.
And is there a link between collective narcissism and
nationalism?
Uh, YEAH, and that's in part what uh what
I was describing earlier. So nationalism, uh, is often
distinguished, uh, in research on this topic and also
among political theorists, uh, from patriotism. Again, patriotism is
like what I described as in-group satisfaction at the
national level. You just feel proud of your nation
and your membership in it. Uh, THAT'S often distinguished
from nationalism, which again is, uh, believing not only
is your nation great or good or something worth
being proud of, but you think that it should,
you know, get its way with other countries all
the time, that it should dominate them, it's so
great that, uh, it should be superior to all
other national groups. Uh, SO what we find is
that collective narcissism is very much a predictor of
nationalism. They're not the same thing, but they relate
to one another very highly. So people who have
kind of an exaggerated love of their nation but
feel like others don't respect it, national collective narcissists,
they also tend to be nationalists in the sense
of wanting their nation to dominate others, thinking it's
superior to all other nations and what have you.
But again, you get the same dynamic once you
consider a collective narcissism and in-group satisfaction at the
same time. Once you, uh, take into consideration, once
you remove the portion of in-group satisfaction that overlaps
with collective narcissism, you find that non-narcissistic in-group satisfaction
is actually associated with reduced nationalism. So less of
a strong feeling of national superiority or that the
national in-group has the right to dominate others.
So I have one more question about collective narcissism
before we move on to other topics. Was there
a link between collective narcissism and perceptions that the
2020 election in the US was illegitimate?
Uh, YES, um, so national collective narcissism, uh, first
to take a step back, uh, it's very generally
associated with conspiratorial beliefs. Um, AND this is something
that's not just found in the context of the
United States politics, but elsewhere. Uh, SO people who
are high in national collective narcissism, they tend to
be very prone to conspiratorial thinking and conspiratorial beliefs
about why bad things are happening, why outcomes they
might not like are happening, why the nation has
fallen on hard times or Uh, why the nation
is not headed in the right direction. Uh, AND
in particular, uh, you know, if you look in
European context, uh, national collective narcissism is, you know,
associated with all kinds of conspiracy theories about, uh,
how outside groups or minorities within the nation are
somehow traitorously undermining, uh, the nation. Uh, IN the
United States, uh, a very good recent example of
this is the one you mentioned. Um, SO in
the wake of the 2020 election, of course, we
saw a lot of election denial, um, basically this
idea that, uh, uh, Joe Biden had not won
the election, that there had been some kind of
rigging of it and that Donald Trump had actually
won. Uh, SO, uh, in some of the research
we did, we found that national collective narcissism. Uh,
AGAIN, after you control for a plain old in
group satisfaction, uh, that that is strongly, strongly associated
with believing that there was cheating in the 2020
election, that Donald Trump had actually really won it.
Other research shows that People who are higher in
national collective narcissism are also willing to support, uh,
potentially violent, illegal, or extraconstitutional methods of reversing the
2020 election outcome. So there are really two parts
of that. One, collective narcissism is very much associated
with conspiratorial beliefs, people who have an exaggerated. View
of the worth or exceptional nature of the in-group,
uh, they tend to want to blame anything bad
that happens in their eyes on some outside group,
uh, that's kind of interfering with the true nature
of things. But in particular, in the context of
the 2020 election, we found that um it was
very much uh collective narcissism was very much associated
with uh election-related conspiratorial beliefs.
So we've talked about collective narcissism. Is there also
self-esteem at the group level? And if so, what
kinds of effects does it have when it comes
to attitudes toward out groups?
Um, WELL, um, social psychologists do have, uh, a
concept known as collective self-esteem, which is really sort
of, you know, an analog of self-esteem at the
personal level. Personal self-esteem is how positively or negatively
do you evaluate yourself as an individual. Collective self-esteem,
um, is, uh, really sort of this idea. Uh,
IT'S how positively or negatively do you identify, uh,
do you evaluate, excuse me, the groups that you
belong to, and there are multiple aspects of it,
and, um, Uh, you know, there's sort of, uh,
the two most important parts of it are what
we call public self-esteem and private, uh, public collective
self-esteem and private collective self-esteem. Public is what do
you think other people think of, uh, the, uh,
group you belong to. Private is what do you
think, uh, how do you evaluate the group you
belong to? Uh, USUALLY these things kind of go
together. So if you think other people like your
group, you like your group as well. Um, BUT,
uh, in general, um, we find that, uh. Collective
self-esteem, it's, you know, associated with, you know, liking
your in-group, of course, and, you know, often, you
know, wanting to do things that help the in-group.
Um, IT can often, you know, it's often related
to how strongly do you feel, uh, how strongly
attached do you feel to your group? Do you
feel a strong link to it? Uh, NOW, interestingly,
uh, there is a bit of a link, uh,
between different types of collective self-esteem and what we
call collective narcissism. So remember that collective narcissism is
sort of an exaggerated sense of the worth of
the in-group, believing that it is truly unique in
some way and special, combined with this perception that
others don't respect the in-group enough. So one interesting
thing we find is that, uh, people who are
high in private collective self-esteem, so people who think
that, um, Uh, their group is really great, and
personally evaluate their in-group as being wonderful. Uh, PEOPLE
who are high in private collective self-esteem while being
low in public collective self-esteem, tend to be collective
narcissists. Remember, public collective self-esteem is, what do you
think other people think of your group? So people
who think very highly personally of their own group,
but think that others don't think highly of it,
those people tend to have this collective narcissistic way
of viewing things. And again, that's sort of what
collective narcissism is. It's, you know, again, really loving
your in-group in an almost exaggerated or inaccurate way,
but at the same time believing that others don't
respect it. Um, SO that particular combination of forms
of collective self-esteem does seem to manifest itself in
terms of this collective narcissism thing we've been talking
about.
OK, so, uh, another topic now, what is ideological
uncertainty?
Uh, IDEOLOGICAL uncertainty, um, uh, I think the the
piece of research to be sure that you're, um,
you know, referring to with Joe Vitriol and others,
that's something I will note. I've been, I was
a little bit more tangentially involved in, so you
might not get as much out of me on
this one, but, uh, ideological uncertainty is like really,
you know, how much uncertainty do you perceive. Uh,
ABOUT where you stand on the ideological spectrum. So
some people very have a deep sense of certainty
that they are a conservative or a deep sense
of certainty that they're a liberal. Uh, THEY'VE thought
about it, they, these beliefs are very important to
them, and they don't feel any sort of doubt
about what their actual position or beliefs is. Uh,
OTHER people are a little bit more uncertain. They're
not really sure whether they're as much of a
liberal or as much of a conservative as they
are. Um, SO, uh, that's sort of what we
call in psychology, uh, a metacognitive belief. How do
you think about your own thinking, essentially. And, uh,
so, you know, people can have a consciousness that
they're very certain about what they believe ideologically. People
can also have sort of a consciousness that they
are not so certain. And, um, in general, what
we find, um, or what this research finds is
that people who uh are more certain, they use,
uh, their ideological identification, so their social identification as
a liberal or a conservative to make more judgments
about things, to organize more of their political preferences.
Um, SO it's not just enough that a person
sort of generally thinks of themselves as being on
the left or being on the right as a
broad social identity. Um, THERE'S also an element of
how certain do you feel about what it is
you think you are ideologically. If you do feel
more certainty, then, you know, basically what that suggests.
Is that that identity you hold as being either
a liberal or a conservative, a member of the
left or a member of the right, that's going
to inform a wider range of other judgments you
make about issues, candidates, and what have you.
Does ideological uncertainty lead people to invest themselves more
into politics or to disengage from politics?
Well, uh, uh, does certainty do that?
UNCERTAINTY, yes. Yes,
so, um, in general, uh, The uncertainty of different
sorts can lead, uh, people to do different things.
Um, YOU know, there's actually some research in social
psychology which suggests that if you, uh, generate or
induce a very general sense of uncertainty about the
self, like who am I? That kind of uncertainty
about that big question, uh, you can sometimes get
people to identify more strongly with other groups. Now,
uh, it works a little bit differently when you
zero in on, uh, uncertainty about specific identities or
specific aspects of the self. So when, you know,
my colleagues and I did the research on ideological
uncertainty, we're not really asking about how uncertainty you
feel about yourself in general, but how uncertain do
you feel about uh your ideological, uh, Uh, viewpoint,
uh, in particular, and there we find that, uh,
you know, for individuals who are a little bit
more uncertain, uh, again, it's not Front and center
to the same extent in uh how they see
themselves and how they make judgments about any number
of things. So when we talk very specifically about
uncertainty in the ideological sense or uncertainty about one's
ideological identity, um, all other things being equal, it's
gonna sort of dial things down in terms of
the extent to which you're walking around and making
all kinds of judgments in terms of ideology.
So, is there a link between religiosity and political
ideology, and if so, what, what would it be?
Uh, WELL, again, that really sort of depends uh
on the context and the group. Um, SO here
we're thinking of religiosity as sort of a compound
variable, a combination of like, do you see yourself
as religious? Do you practice, uh, your religion, uh,
do you attend services and things like that. Um,
IN general, it really sort of depends on the
context you're in. Uh, TRADITIONALLY, greater levels of religiosity.
Um, HAD been associated with conservatism. There's a decent
amount of evidence in countries like the United States
that the more religious you are, uh, the more
likely you are to, uh, identify as conservative, and,
you know, there's even Some psychological research, uh, that
suggests that under certain circumstances, you know, the same
things that attract you to being more religious will
also attract you to being more conservative. Now, uh,
the, uh, thing is that it sort of breaks
down or it's not as consistent across all time
periods and uh all uh groups in society. So
this is where research, uh, Uh, in political science
is especially important. So at this point, uh, if
you look at the entire United States population, typically
what you find is that people who are higher
in religiosity, uh, they're more likely to identify as
Republicans in terms of partisanship. Um, So that's a
pretty robust finding, but the question is, is that
something that's universal or is it a function of
uh particular forces that we've seen operating in, say,
the last 30 or 40 years. And actually as
it turns out, if you rewind things, uh you
find if you go back to the 70s or
80s, there really isn't a relationship between how religious
you are and what party you belong to or
vote for. That's something that really sort of steadily
emerged and grew after about 1992. So why is
that? Um, THE reason that's typically offered, um, By
political scientists who studied this, is that political leaders,
again, what I was calling political elites earlier, they
started to diverge more in the extent to which
they, uh, endorsed religious traditionalism, a large public role
for religion, and what have you. The Republicans became
more oriented toward public religiosity and religious traditional. WHEREAS
the Democrats became more oriented to having a more
secular society. And this in turn kind of reflects
some of the things that we talked about earlier
about political coalitions. Uh, THE typical answer that political
scientists give here is that, uh, religious conservatives and
in particular, uh, Protestant religious conservatives, evangelicals, fundamentalists, whatever
you want to. Whatever term you want to use
became a more significant portion of the Republican coalition
starting in the late 70s, growing through the 80s
and then really kind of solidifying in the 1990s.
So, from about the late 80s, early 1990s onward,
you see Republican leaders and Democratic leaders sending different
signals about um you know, uh You know, whether
they're the party for religious people or people who
are not religious. Now, um, there's an important caveat
to all that. Even though that's changed over time,
it's changed more for some groups than for others.
So in particular, uh, you find that there's an
especially strong link in the United States between religiosity
and identifying with the Republican Party and voting for
the Republican Party among white Americans. So that relationship
is pretty strong and pretty robust, and to the
extent that you observe this increasing relationship between being
religious and being republican. Uh, IT'S most pronounced among
white Americans. Uh, IT'S far weaker among black Americans,
and in fact, sometimes you even find that black
Americans who are more religious tend to be more
identified with the Democratic Party. Uh, THE relationships also
weaker among, uh, Latinos and Asian Americans, though there
is some relation. THERE. So in part, it also
reflects uh differences in culture across groups in the
United States.
OK, so, uh, I would like to get into
the last, I think what will, I think will
be the last topic of our conversation today. I
would like to ask you now about feelings of
group extinction threats. So, what is this about and
then perhaps we can get into a specific example
of it.
Um, OK, so this, uh, again, it's a line
of research I've been a little bit more tangentially,
uh, involved in. This is work that was spearheaded
by my student, uh, Max Bai. Uh, SO a
lot of this is work that he took the
lead on and that he really needs to be
given, you know, uh, credit for in terms of
like the research results. But group extinction threat, broadly
speaking, is, uh, a fear that, uh, The in-group
will be physically wiped out, essentially, you know, severely
reduced in uh terms of its percentage in the
population and in its numbers. And, uh, you know,
we find that that is very much related to
uh intergroup hostility.
Mhm. So, in the specific case of white people,
how do they react to their perceived numerical decline
in certain countries?
Well, um, again, you know, uh, there's considerable variation
uh among members of different groups including white Americans
and, you know, the extent to which, uh, you
know, they experience extinction threat. And, you know, actually
not that many, you know, white Americans feel that
way about things, uh, but there's variation among individuals
and that variation is significant in terms of the
other thing it relates to. So, uh, one thing
that Max studied in some of his work, um,
which he did with me. Uh, IS, you know,
where does this sense of group extinction threat come
from? Um, AND partly, uh, the feeling is that
it has to do, or the evidence suggests that
it has to do with, uh, a belief, not
just that other groups are growing, uh, as a
percentage of population, so say immigrants or specific racial
and ethnic groups. Black Americans, Latino Americans, and so
on and so forth, but a very specific belief
that white Americans are declining as a percentage of
the United States population. So that belief in particular
really seems to align very much with an imagined
belief that somehow, uh, the in-group is going to
be a racial in-group is going to be extinguished.
And in turn that sort of predicts those two
beliefs, thinking that your group is declining as a
proportion of the population or in numbers, and then
group extinction threat. Those things are also related to
certain kinds of policy attitudes. And, you know, certain
kinds of political preferences. So one thing that both
of those things relate to very strongly are, you
know, strongly anti-immigrant or immigrant restriction, uh, immigration restrictionist
positions, uh, wanting to kind of turn off immigration,
uh, crack down very hard on, uh, illegal immigration.
And uh things like that. It's also associated in
some of the evidence that we collected or data
we collected with uh support for uh far far
right movements, so Nazism, uh, the KKK, uh, the
outright, um, so far right politics as well.
So is there a link here with racial biases
and conservatism or not?
Um, WELL, it's, uh, most research, uh, does find
some level of a of correlation between those two
things and in the present era in the United
States, uh, it is not a perfect relation. So
one thing that has to be understood is that,
uh, just as we observe that relationship, it does
not mean that everyone who identifies with the political
right or who identifies as a conservative, is some
raging racist. Uh, IT is a probabilistic relationship. All
other things being equal. Um, And, uh, so it
exists, it's not a perfect relationship, um, and again,
in terms of why we see that, um, Uh,
there are two theories. One is that it's a
top-down, uh, top-down effect. So in this regard, uh,
the idea is that again, you have to look
at the nature of political conflict in the United
States, and um, A major source of conflict throughout
American history has been, you know, uh, uh, civil
rights or racial equality. Are we going to have
a multiracial democracy or are we going to have
some system where whites dominate and have some kind
of superior status? This is a endless conflict in
the United States, and most of our major flashpoints
are related to it in some way. Uh, SO,
you know, in the 1960s you see a decisive
move towards civil rights. Uh, uh, THE legal apparatus
of segregation and white supremacy is dismantled, of course,
in multiple ways, but you know that doesn't end
differences within the population about the desirability of racial
equality. So over time, You see this, uh, resurface
as something that divides people in a partisan and
ideological way. So, you know, one way of looking
at this is to kind of look at how,
you know, the two parties divide in terms of
the extent to which they bring on board, uh,
white Americans in particular but not exclusively, uh, who
are opposed to racial equality, uh. Before the 1960s,
you know, the Democratic Party has a very strong
racist element to it, concentrated in the American South,
and the Republican Party has a very strong pro-civil
rights, not universal, but it does have a pro-civil
rights faction. After, um, in particular, one thing you
see after civil rights is an acceleration of party
sorting on, uh, you know, how far should we
go with civil rights? Should we keep it up?
Should the government play an active role in, uh,
helping to guarantee racial equality, or is it something
that, you know, the government should stay out of?
And one thing you see over time is a
greater pairing of a lot of the themes that
are associated with the political conservatism in the United
States. So having a small government, less government intervention,
getting the government off people's backs, and uh sort
of hostility toward further action to bring about greater
racial equality. So part of this is sort of
a top-down process. Uh, POLITICAL leaders are sort of
pairing traditional conservative themes which don't necessarily have to
go with, you know, a preference for racial inequality
or indifference to civil rights. Uh, THEY'RE just kind
of pairing them as part of the belief package.
Uh, SO that's, you know, one force, um, you
know, another, you know, potential role there is that,
well, Um, you can look at the certain aspects
of, uh, conservative ideology, in particular, the part of
it that sort of is more lenient toward economic
inequality and more opposed to re redistribution of economic
resources and say, OK, that. Something that tends to
increase or maintain the amount of inequality in society.
And if you look at civil rights policy on
the other hand, and, you know, feelings about, uh,
racial equality, that's also something that intrinsically touches on
questions of, well, how, how much equality should we
work for in society. And there is some evidence,
uh, my, my advisor, my late advisor, Professor Jim
Zedans, you know, he did work on something, uh,
called social dominance orientation, and social dominance orientation is
sort of the general characteristic or belief. That reflects
the extent to which you like groups to be
more equal with one another or the degree to
which you think it's OK for some groups to
dominate other groups. And as it turns out, that's
something that applies to all kinds of group distinctions.
So part of it may just be that um
People who generally are indifferent to equality as a
value might be attracted to a variety of themes.
Uh, I mean, I would say at this point
in the United States, a lot of it reflects
top-down effects. Um, IT'S just kind of how party
leaders have packaged different things together as a matter
of ideology. And again, like we talked about at
the beginning, this sort of reflects political leaders strategic
judgments about, well, how can I assemble a winning
coalition. And part of what you saw after civil
rights in the United States is, um, uh, you
know, laws were passed and uh a lot was
changed in a very short period of time, but
you still have a large number of white Americans
and others, uh, particularly in the American South, who
had been socialized. Uh, TO think that America was
always going to have segregation, that whites would always
be on top. So there is a group of
people that are dissatisfied with the trajectory of things.
Well, if, you know, you're trying to build a
political coalition and in particular divide the previous, uh,
another political coalition, say the Democratic coalition, one thing
you want to do is try to attract some
of those people who are dissatisfied with the Democrats
becoming a civil rights party. Because again, you have
to remember that prior to the civil rights era,
again, you have this strong southern wing of the
Democratic Party that's very much OK with segregation.
Right, right. So, I have one final question then.
If this is about perceptions because even earlier when
I asked you about white people reacting to this,
I mentioned uh the word I used was perceived
numerical decline. If this is about perceptions, is it
then safe to say that people being exposed to
conspiracy theories like the great replacement theory can lead
them to develop these feelings of group extinction threat
or not?
Yeah, I think that I think that that's correct.
Um, YOU know, in terms of like how we
are built. How our cognitive and mental architecture works,
um, you know, we probably very much evolved as
a species to track things like the well-being of
our group and the interests of our group, and,
you know, what's happening to people in our coalition,
however, coalition. IS defined. So we have kind of
a very general set of mechanisms that, you know,
focus on that thing. But you have to remember
that when we evolved those mechanisms, or when those
mechanisms were naturally selected, uh, we lived in fairly
small hunter-gatherer type groups, groups of people where there
was a lot of face to face contact and
immediate awareness. Of whatever might be hurting your group
or could hurt your group. But now we live
in mass a mass society, and in particular a
mass political society. Uh, THE groups that we belong
to, in particular racial groups, um, are enormous. They're
just broad abstract categories, and, you know, if you
think about how, um, Human beings evolved to think
about groups, race wouldn't have been, as we understand
it, as a type of social distinction, as we
understand it, would never have been a thing that
was going to act on what traits were selected
in people. Because, you know, again, you never left
about. 30 or 60 miles from where you were
born and you didn't live that long in many
respects. So there's very little chance that when our
brains evolved and when natural selection was acting most
heavily on them that we ever encountered people who
were racially distinct in the modern social sense of
the term race. Uh, BUT we are kind of,
uh, predisposed to identify groups that we belong to,
coalitions we belong to, and what have you. But
the question is, where do the inputs to all
those cognitive mechanisms that kind of allow us to
see who's a friend and who's a foe, uh,
where are those coming from? And the question is,
well, they're coming from the media, and in particular,
um, as a political scientist, they would say they're
coming from political leaders. Uh, YOU know, if you
belong to a particular political party or identify with
a particular ideology, you are predisposed to some extent
to listen to people who share that ideology or
your party membership at the leadership level, and leaders
can play a large role in kind of, uh.
THOSE beliefs or making those beliefs more salient. So
we have a lot to worry about when political
leaders do spread things, uh, that are conspiratorial in
nature like the great replacement theory. And you see
over and over again in the history of politics,
it's conspiratorial stuff like that. This or that group
is plotting to replace this or that group with
Some other third group that, you know, really can
lead up to uh things that are deeply violent,
deeply oppressive, and what have you. So a lot
of this is not stuff that people are directly
seeing on their own, it's ideas that they're getting,
uh, from political discourse, and political discourse can kind
of Tone those ideas down or it can amplify
them.
Great. So just before we go, would you like
to tell people where they can find you and
your work on the internet?
Uh, YOU can find me on my University of
Minnesota website, just search for Christopher M. Federico. I
don't have the URL off the top of my
head right now, but, uh, I'm out there.
Great. So I will be leaving a link to
that in the description of the interview and Doctor
Federico, thank you so much again for taking the
time to come on the show. It's been a
real pleasure to talk with you.
All right, thank you very much. It was a
good interview.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes calling in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir, Samuel Andre Francis Forti Agnseroro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Labray and Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David Sloan
Wilson, asilla dearauurumen Roach Diego London Correa. Yannick Punter
Darusmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine,
Gary Galman Sam of Zallirianeioltonin John Barboza, Julian Price,
Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fre Frankortolotti Gabriel Ponscorteseus
Slelisky, Scott Zacharyish Tim Duffyani Smith John Wieman. Daniel
Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous,
Chris Williamson, Peter Wozin, David Williams, Diocosta, Anton Eriksson,
Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, bungalow
atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo. Sterry Michael
Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassyigoren, Jeff McMann, Jake Zu,
Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris
Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brandon,
Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perrolis,
Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud
Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula Gudinov, Gregory Hastings,
David Pinsoff, Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Net.
A special thanks to my producers. These are Webb,
Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon,
Benedict Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, Gian
Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to
my executive producers Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets,
and Rosie. Thank you for all.